README.md, before:

# cloudflare DDNS Script

cloudflare-DDNS-script is a Bash script that automatically updates Cloudflare DNS records with your current external IP address. It supports both IPv4 and IPv6, and can update multiple domains across different Cloudflare zones simultaneously. This script is particularly useful for any user who has a dynamic IP address and wants to keep their Cloudflare DNS records up to date without having an additional DDNS provider.

## Features

- Updates both A (IPv4) and AAAA (IPv6) records
- Supports multiple domains across different Cloudflare zones
- Configurable automatic creation of non-existent DNS records
- Uses multiple sources to reliably fetch public IP addresses
- Configurable Time To Live (TTL) and proxy settings
- Backup and restore functionality for DNS records
- Optional Telegram notifications for updates
- Command-line options for configuration overrides
- Detailed logging with automatic cleanup of old entries
- Detailed logging for easy troubleshooting (including API responses)

## Prerequisites

- Bash shell
- `git` command-line tool (for installation and updates)
- `curl` command-line tool
- `jq` command-line tool (for backup/restore functionality)
- A Cloudflare account with the domain(s) you want to update
- Cloudflare API token with the necessary permissions

## Installation

1. Clone this repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/Ate329/cloudflare-DDNS-script.git
   cd cloudflare-DDNS-script
   ```

2. Make the scripts executable:
   ```bash
   chmod +x cloudflare-dns-update.sh update.sh
   ```

3. Change the configurations in the configuration file named `cloudflare-dns-update.conf` in the same directory as the script based on your needs (see Configuration section below).

## Updating

The script includes a robust update mechanism that preserves your configuration while safely adding any new options. To update to the latest version:

1. Simply run:
   ```bash
   ./update.sh
   ```

The update script will:
- Create a timestamped backup of your current configuration, log files, and the update script itself
- Maintain a history of the last 10 backups for safety (stored in `./backups/`)
- Check if you're in a git repository and on the main branch
- Check for any local changes and offer to stash them safely
- Verify the git repository and remote configuration
- Check if the update script itself needs updating (and if so, update it first)
- Pull the latest changes from the repository
- Intelligently merge any new configuration options while:
  - Preserving all your existing settings, comments, and file permissions
  - Adding new options in their correct sections with descriptive comments
  - Creating a `.new` file for you to review any changes
- Restore your configuration and log files
- Restore any stashed local changes
- Verify the integrity of all updated files
- Make sure all scripts are executable

### Safety Features

The update process includes several safety measures:
- All operations are atomic (they either complete fully or not at all)
- File permissions are preserved during backup and restore
- Stashed changes are automatically restored even if the script is interrupted
- File integrity is verified at multiple steps
- Backup directory names include timestamps and process IDs to prevent conflicts
- The update script updates itself first to ensure the latest update logic is used

### Backup System

The script maintains backups in the `./backups/` directory with the following structure:
```
backups/
├── YYYYMMDD_HHMMSS_PID/  (most recent)
│   ├── cloudflare-dns-update.conf
│   ├── cloudflare-dns-update.log
│   └── update.sh
├── YYYYMMDD_HHMMSS_PID/  (previous)
│   └── ...
└── ...
```

Only the last 10 backups are kept to prevent excessive disk usage. Each backup is stored in a timestamped directory with a unique process ID for easy identification and recovery.

### Update Troubleshooting

Common issues and solutions:

1. **Git Not Found**
   - Error: "git is not installed"
   - Solution: Install git using your system's package manager

2. **Permission Denied**
   - Error: "Permission denied" when running update.sh
   - Solution: Make sure the script is executable: `chmod +x update.sh`

3. **Local Changes Conflict**
   - Issue: You have local changes that conflict with updates
   - Solution: Either commit your changes or allow the script to stash them
   - Note: Stashed changes will be automatically restored after the update

4. **Configuration Merge Issues**
   - Issue: New configuration options not appearing in correct sections
   - Solution: Check the `.new` file created during update and manually adjust if needed
   - Note: Your original configuration is always backed up before any changes

5. **Update Script Modified**
   - Issue: Update script was modified during update
   - Solution: Run the update script again as prompted
   - Note: The old version is safely backed up before any changes

6. **Script Interruption**
   - Issue: Update process was interrupted
   - Solution: Run the update script again
   - Note: The script will automatically clean up and restore stashed changes

For other issues:
- Check the log file (`cloudflare-dns-update.log`) for detailed error messages
- Look in the backup directory for previous versions of your files
- The script will automatically roll back changes if any part of the update fails

## Usage

The script can be run in several ways:

1. Basic usage:
   ```bash
   ./cloudflare-dns-update.sh
   ```

2. With command-line options:
   ```bash
   ./cloudflare-dns-update.sh -c custom.conf -d "zoneid:domain.com" -6 yes
   ```

3. Backup DNS records:
   ```bash
   ./cloudflare-dns-update.sh --backup
   ```

4. Restore from backup:
   ```bash
   ./cloudflare-dns-update.sh --restore dns_backup_20240101_120000.json
   ```

### Automatic Updates

For automatic updates, you can set up a cron job. For example, to run the script every 5 minutes:

#### In most Linux/Unix Distributions
Run the command:
```bash
crontab -e
```

And add the following:
```bash
*/5 * * * * /path/to/cloudflare-dns-update.sh
```

#### For NixOS
It's recommended to do this declaratively in NixOS.

In your configuration.nix:
```nix
services.cron = {
  enable = true;
  systemCronJobs = [
    "*/5 * * * *   [username]   /path/to/cloudflare-dns-update.sh"
  ];
};

# You might need to install cron as well
environment.systemPackages = [
  pkgs.cron
];
```

Example:
```nix
services.cron = {
  enable = true;
  systemCronJobs = [
    "*/5 * * * *   guest   /home/guest/cloudflare-DDNS-script/cloudflare-dns-update.sh"
  ];
};
```

### Command-line Options

| Option | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `-c, --config FILE` | Use specified config file |
| `-d, --domains STRING` | Override domain configs |
| `-t, --token STRING` | Override Cloudflare API token |
| `-6, --ipv6 yes/no` | Enable/disable IPv6 support |
| `-p, --proxy true/false` | Enable/disable Cloudflare proxy |
| `-l, --ttl NUMBER` | Set TTL (1 or 120-7200) |
| `--backup` | Backup current DNS records |
| `--restore FILE` | Restore DNS records from backup file |
| `-h, --help` | Show help message |

## Configuration

The configuration is in a file named `cloudflare-dns-update.conf`. Replace the placeholder values with your actual Cloudflare credentials:

```bash
### Domain configurations
# Format: domain_configs="zoneid1:domain1.com,domain2.com;zoneid2:domain3.com,domain4.com"
domain_configs="your_cloudflare_zone_id1:example1.com,sub1.example1.com;your_cloudflare_zone_id2:example2.com,sub2.example2.com"

### Global settings
cloudflare_zone_api_token="your_cloudflare_api_token"
enable_ipv6="no"  # Set to "yes" to enable IPv6 updates
use_same_record_for_ipv6="yes"  # Set to "no" to use different records for IPv6
dns_record_ipv6=""  # Only used if use_same_record_for_ipv6 is set to "no"
ttl=1  # Or any value between 120 and 7200 (1 for automatic)
proxied=false  # Or true
auto_create_records="yes"  # Set to "no" to skip creating non-existent records

### Error handling settings
max_retries=3  # Maximum number of retry attempts for failed API calls
retry_delay=5  # Initial delay between retries in seconds (will increase exponentially)
max_retry_delay=60  # Maximum delay between retries in seconds

### Log settings
log_cleanup_days=7  # Number of days to keep logs (0 to disable cleanup)

### Telegram notification settings (optional)
notify_telegram="no"  # Or "yes"
telegram_bot_token="your_telegram_bot_token"  # If using Telegram notifications
telegram_chat_id="your_telegram_chat_id"  # If using Telegram notifications
```

You can find your Zone IDs in the Cloudflare dashboard under the domain's overview page.

This is where you can get your API Tokens: https://dash.cloudflare.com/profile/api-tokens   
***You should get the API Tokens by clicking the "Create Token" button instead of the API Keys.   
(API Tokens and keys are DIFFERENT)***

### Configuration Options

The script supports the following configuration options:

| Option | Values | Description |
|--------|--------|-------------|
| `domain_configs` | string | Semicolon-separated list of zone configurations |
| `cloudflare_zone_api_token` | string | Your Cloudflare API token |
| `enable_ipv6` | "yes"/"no" | Whether to update AAAA (IPv6) records |
| `use_same_record_for_ipv6` | "yes"/"no" | Whether to use the same domain names for IPv6 records |
| `dns_record_ipv6` | string | Comma-separated list of IPv6 domains |
| `ttl` | 1 or 120-7200 | Time To Live in seconds (1 for automatic) |
| `proxied` | true/false | Whether to proxy the DNS records through Cloudflare |
| `auto_create_records` | "yes"/"no" | Whether to automatically create non-existent DNS records |
| `max_retries` | integer | Maximum number of retry attempts for failed API calls |
| `retry_delay` | integer | Initial delay between retries in seconds |
| `max_retry_delay` | integer | Maximum delay between retries in seconds |
| `log_cleanup_days` | integer | Number of days to keep log entries |
| `notify_telegram` | "yes"/"no" | Whether to send Telegram notifications |
| `telegram_bot_token` | string | Your Telegram bot API token |
| `telegram_chat_id` | string | Your Telegram chat ID |

## Logging

The script creates a log file named `cloudflare-dns-update.log` in the same directory. This log file contains information about each run of the script, including any errors encountered.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit Pull Requests, Questions or Feature Requests.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Disclaimer

This script is provided as-is, without any warranties. Always test thoroughly before using in a production environment.

## Acknowledgments

- Thanks to Cloudflare for providing a robust API.
- Thanks to various public IP services for enabling reliable IP address retrieval.
- Thanks to ChatGPT for generating this README as well.
- Motivated by [DDNS-Cloudflare-Bash](https://github.com/fire1ce/DDNS-Cloudflare-Bash)

Commit message:

add option max_update_backups in the config file

README.md, after:

# cloudflare DDNS Script

cloudflare-DDNS-script is a Bash script that automatically updates Cloudflare DNS records with your current external IP address. It supports both IPv4 and IPv6, and can update multiple domains across different Cloudflare zones simultaneously. This script is particularly useful for any user who has a dynamic IP address and wants to keep their Cloudflare DNS records up to date without having an additional DDNS provider.

## Features

- Updates both A (IPv4) and AAAA (IPv6) records
- Supports multiple domains across different Cloudflare zones
- Configurable automatic creation of non-existent DNS records
- Uses multiple sources to reliably fetch public IP addresses
- Configurable Time To Live (TTL) and proxy settings
- Backup and restore functionality for DNS records
- Optional Telegram notifications for updates
- Command-line options for configuration overrides
- Detailed logging with automatic cleanup of old entries
- Detailed logging for easy troubleshooting (including API responses)

## Prerequisites

- Bash shell
- `git` command-line tool (for installation and updates)
- `curl` command-line tool
- `jq` command-line tool (for backup/restore functionality)
- A Cloudflare account with the domain(s) you want to update
- Cloudflare API token with the necessary permissions

## Installation

1. Clone this repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/Ate329/cloudflare-DDNS-script.git
   cd cloudflare-DDNS-script
   ```

2. Make the scripts executable:
   ```bash
   chmod +x cloudflare-dns-update.sh update.sh
   ```

3. Change the configurations in the configuration file named `cloudflare-dns-update.conf` in the same directory as the script based on your needs (see Configuration section below).

## Updating

The script includes a robust update mechanism that preserves your configuration while safely adding any new options. To update to the latest version:

1. Simply run:
   ```bash
   ./update.sh
   ```

The update script will:
- Create a timestamped backup of your current configuration, log files, and the update script itself
- Maintain a history of the last 10 backups for safety (stored in `./backups/`)
- Check if you're in a git repository and on the main branch
- Check for any local changes and offer to stash them safely
- Verify the git repository and remote configuration
- Check if the update script itself needs updating (and if so, update it first)
- Pull the latest changes from the repository
- Intelligently merge any new configuration options while:
  - Preserving all your existing settings, comments, and file permissions
  - Adding new options in their correct sections with descriptive comments
  - Creating a `.new` file for you to review any changes
- Restore your configuration and log files
- Restore any stashed local changes
- Verify the integrity of all updated files
- Make sure all scripts are executable

### Safety Features

The update process includes several safety measures:
- All operations are atomic (they either complete fully or not at all)
- File permissions are preserved during backup and restore
- Stashed changes are automatically restored even if the script is interrupted
- File integrity is verified at multiple steps
- Backup directory names include timestamps and process IDs to prevent conflicts
- The update script updates itself first to ensure the latest update logic is used

### Backup System

The script maintains backups in the `./backups/` directory with the following structure:
```
backups/
├── YYYYMMDD_HHMMSS_PID/  (most recent)
│   ├── cloudflare-dns-update.conf
│   ├── cloudflare-dns-update.log
│   └── update.sh
├── YYYYMMDD_HHMMSS_PID/  (previous)
│   └── ...
└── ...
```

By default, only the last 10 backups are kept to prevent excessive disk usage. You can adjust this number by setting `max_update_backups` in your configuration file. Each backup is stored in a timestamped directory with a unique process ID for easy identification and recovery.

### Update Troubleshooting

Common issues and solutions:

1. **Git Not Found**
   - Error: "git is not installed"
   - Solution: Install git using your system's package manager

2. **Permission Denied**
   - Error: "Permission denied" when running update.sh
   - Solution: Make sure the script is executable: `chmod +x update.sh`

3. **Local Changes Conflict**
   - Issue: You have local changes that conflict with updates
   - Solution: Either commit your changes or allow the script to stash them
   - Note: Stashed changes will be automatically restored after the update

4. **Configuration Merge Issues**
   - Issue: New configuration options not appearing in correct sections
   - Solution: Check the `.new` file created during update and manually adjust if needed
   - Note: Your original configuration is always backed up before any changes

5. **Update Script Modified**
   - Issue: Update script was modified during update
   - Solution: Run the update script again as prompted
   - Note: The old version is safely backed up before any changes

6. **Script Interruption**
   - Issue: Update process was interrupted
   - Solution: Run the update script again
   - Note: The script will automatically clean up and restore stashed changes

For other issues:
- Check the log file (`cloudflare-dns-update.log`) for detailed error messages
- Look in the backup directory for previous versions of your files
- The script will automatically roll back changes if any part of the update fails

## Usage

The script can be run in several ways:

1. Basic usage:
   ```bash
   ./cloudflare-dns-update.sh
   ```

2. With command-line options:
   ```bash
   ./cloudflare-dns-update.sh -c custom.conf -d "zoneid:domain.com" -6 yes
   ```

3. Backup DNS records:
   ```bash
   ./cloudflare-dns-update.sh --backup
   ```

4. Restore from backup:
   ```bash
   ./cloudflare-dns-update.sh --restore dns_backup_20240101_120000.json
   ```

### Automatic Updates

For automatic updates, you can set up a cron job. For example, to run the script every 5 minutes:

#### In most Linux/Unix Distributions
Run the command:
```bash
crontab -e
```

And add the following:
```bash
*/5 * * * * /path/to/cloudflare-dns-update.sh
```

#### For NixOS
It's recommended to do this declaratively in NixOS.

In your configuration.nix:
```nix
services.cron = {
  enable = true;
  systemCronJobs = [
    "*/5 * * * *   [username]   /path/to/cloudflare-dns-update.sh"
  ];
};

# You might need to install cron as well
environment.systemPackages = [
  pkgs.cron
];
```

Example:
```nix
services.cron = {
  enable = true;
  systemCronJobs = [
    "*/5 * * * *   guest   /home/guest/cloudflare-DDNS-script/cloudflare-dns-update.sh"
  ];
};
```

### Command-line Options

| Option | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `-c, --config FILE` | Use specified config file |
| `-d, --domains STRING` | Override domain configs |
| `-t, --token STRING` | Override Cloudflare API token |
| `-6, --ipv6 yes/no` | Enable/disable IPv6 support |
| `-p, --proxy true/false` | Enable/disable Cloudflare proxy |
| `-l, --ttl NUMBER` | Set TTL (1 or 120-7200) |
| `--backup` | Backup current DNS records |
| `--restore FILE` | Restore DNS records from backup file |
| `-h, --help` | Show help message |

## Configuration

The configuration is in a file named `cloudflare-dns-update.conf`. Replace the placeholder values with your actual Cloudflare credentials:

```bash
### Domain configurations
# Format: domain_configs="zoneid1:domain1.com,domain2.com;zoneid2:domain3.com,domain4.com"
domain_configs="your_cloudflare_zone_id1:example1.com,sub1.example1.com;your_cloudflare_zone_id2:example2.com,sub2.example2.com"

### Global settings
cloudflare_zone_api_token="your_cloudflare_api_token"
enable_ipv6="no"  # Set to "yes" to enable IPv6 updates
use_same_record_for_ipv6="yes"  # Set to "no" to use different records for IPv6
dns_record_ipv6=""  # Only used if use_same_record_for_ipv6 is set to "no"
ttl=1  # Or any value between 120 and 7200 (1 for automatic)
proxied=false  # Or true
auto_create_records="yes"  # Set to "no" to skip creating non-existent records

### Error handling settings
max_retries=3  # Maximum number of retry attempts for failed API calls
retry_delay=5  # Initial delay between retries in seconds (will increase exponentially)
max_retry_delay=60  # Maximum delay between retries in seconds

### Log settings
log_cleanup_days=7  # Number of days to keep logs (0 to disable cleanup)

### Telegram notification settings (optional)
notify_telegram="no"  # Or "yes"
telegram_bot_token="your_telegram_bot_token"  # If using Telegram notifications
telegram_chat_id="your_telegram_chat_id"  # If using Telegram notifications
```

You can find your Zone IDs in the Cloudflare dashboard under the domain's overview page.

This is where you can get your API Tokens: https://dash.cloudflare.com/profile/api-tokens   
***You should get the API Tokens by clicking the "Create Token" button instead of the API Keys.   
(API Tokens and keys are DIFFERENT)***

### Configuration Options

The script supports the following configuration options:

| Option | Values | Description |
|--------|--------|-------------|
| `domain_configs` | string | Semicolon-separated list of zone configurations |
| `cloudflare_zone_api_token` | string | Your Cloudflare API token |
| `enable_ipv6` | "yes"/"no" | Whether to update AAAA (IPv6) records |
| `use_same_record_for_ipv6` | "yes"/"no" | Whether to use the same domain names for IPv6 records |
| `dns_record_ipv6` | string | Comma-separated list of IPv6 domains |
| `ttl` | 1 or 120-7200 | Time To Live in seconds (1 for automatic) |
| `proxied` | true/false | Whether to proxy the DNS records through Cloudflare |
| `auto_create_records` | "yes"/"no" | Whether to automatically create non-existent DNS records |
| `max_retries` | integer | Maximum number of retry attempts for failed API calls |
| `retry_delay` | integer | Initial delay between retries in seconds |
| `max_retry_delay` | integer | Maximum delay between retries in seconds |
| `log_cleanup_days` | integer | Number of days to keep log entries |
| `max_update_backups` | integer | Number of update backups to keep (default: 10) |
| `notify_telegram` | "yes"/"no" | Whether to send Telegram notifications |
| `telegram_bot_token` | string | Your Telegram bot API token |
| `telegram_chat_id` | string | Your Telegram chat ID |

## Logging

The script creates a log file named `cloudflare-dns-update.log` in the same directory. This log file contains information about each run of the script, including any errors encountered.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit Pull Requests, Questions or Feature Requests.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Disclaimer

This script is provided as-is, without any warranties. Always test thoroughly before using in a production environment.

## Acknowledgments

- Thanks to Cloudflare for providing a robust API.
- Thanks to various public IP services for enabling reliable IP address retrieval.
- Thanks to ChatGPT for generating this README as well.
- Motivated by [DDNS-Cloudflare-Bash](https://github.com/fire1ce/DDNS-Cloudflare-Bash)
